Hi Andy, Luis,

I've thought about the model a bit during Whittaker's disappointing presentation. Writing down a full likelihood covering both diversity-dependence and location is possible, and pretty straightforward (and essentially the same as what my PhD student is doing for two locations), but the computation is unfeasible because of the extremely high number of states. For example, if a species can be in any of 4 islands, then each species has 2^4 = 16 possible states, and if you have 100 species, there are 16^100 combinations of these states.... And then we're not even considering the species that are not in the phylogeny but did contribute to diversity-dependent speciation or immigration. We can reduce the complexity, by writing down the likelihood for the phylogeny + the number of species in each location, rather than relating each tip to the exact locations, but we may ignore a lot of information by doing so.
We are in the process of developing a way to reduce the dimensionality of problem with extremely large transition matrices, which can then also be used for DAISIE with island-wide diversity-dependence, but this may not be sufficient for this problem.
An alternative solution is to write down the likelihood for an augmented dataset and do MCMC to integrate over the added data. The augmented dataset would include a phylogeny with the locations of all the species in the phylogeny at all times, not just at the tips, and if we consider diversity-dependence with extinction, we also need to include these additional species, and we still have a complex problem. Without extinction, things are a bit simpler, and this is what the Sys Biol paper I mentioned (attached) does. (The name I was looking for is Stephane Guindon...). Without diversity-dependence things are even simpler, because a model like GeoSSE can be used that utilizes the independence of lineages.
One of the features of DAISIE is that it accounts for recolonizations of the mainland species: it cannot take place before speciation, because it would then change the data (the last colonization event marks the divergence). I got the impression that you think that recolonizations do not occur, but that seems highly unlikely to me: if colonizations happen often, then recolonizations should not be rare. What is it that makes you think recolonization does not occur?

Could you send me an example data set (phylogeny + locations), and some thoughts on which simplifying assumptions could be made?
Cheers,

Rampal